User Input
The user input for Project Icarus consists of three groups of twenty infra red emitting LED's.  Each group of LED's is strategically placed on the user to determine arm position.  To do this, a group is placed on each wrist and one in between the shoulders on the back.  This placement ensures that we can accurately capture all the user movements that are needed to turn, glide, fall and flap.

The actual tracking devices are constructed of two pieces of Velcro stuck back to back.  This ensures that the user can easily don and remove them without damaging the circuit (Figure XX) inside.  In order to wrap the tracking device around an individuals wrist, stranded wire is soldered in between each LED.  This dramatically increases the flexibility of the circuit and reduces the chance of having to re-solder any joint.  This is especially important since the circuit is sandwiched between two pieces of Velcro that are stuck together with adhesive.

In order to capture the movement of the user, a common web camera which does not filter out infra red light is placed on a tripod or other stable device behind the user.  To ease in user tracking and block out all unwanted visible light, a small piece of infra red pass filter material is placed over the camera sensor, but before the lens.  The result of this is a black image except for anything from an infra red source.  This means that any indoor lighting or images from projectors will not show up.  This is important so that only the LED tracking devices are seen from the camera.  The camera is then put slightly out of focus to blend the LED's in each group together to form one blob.  The three light blobs are then used to calculate arm position.


Problems
Originally, no intrusive device was to be used for interaction, the idea was to illuminate a person with an external infra red light source.  Unfortunately, the size of source needed to illuminate an entire individual in a cave environment is quite large and ultimately, too expensive for the scope of this particular project.  If more funding becomes available, this option will be taken into greater consideration.

The light emitting circuit shown in Figure XX requires 9 volts and approximately 400mA to operate.  Each light source includes a connection for a standard 9v battery to satisfy the power needs.  A standard, rechargeable 9v NiMH battery has about 150mAh of capacity but can go up to around 625 mAh for Alkaline.  To keep cost down, we try to use the rechargeable type whenever possible.  Using rechargeable batteries, however, leads to less usable time (~22 minuets), and the batteries need to be changed more often. 

One issue that was not foreseen is the angles in which the user needs to hold his or her arms.  If the user's wrist is far out of perpendicular to the camera from a top view (see Figure XX), the light can disappear from the camera's view.  This is due to a property of the LED's and also the way in which they are mounted.  The LED's emitted light is only visible when viewed from less then approximately 20 degrees off vertical (see Figure XX).  The result of this limitation is that when the user's arms come forward (away from camera) the LED's on the wrist are more likely to be out of this range and the stationary camera is unable to detect the light.  Since the LED's are mounted around the wrist, the local wrist rotation is not as much of an issue as when the user brings his or her wrists forward.  This is a limitation in the LED's so the only solution would be adding LED's facing in other directions.  Adding LED's would decrease the already short lifespan of the battery, thus, sufficient instruction is given to the user to keep the lights relatively perpendicular to the camera.
